# Getting Started with RSpec

• How to install RSpec and write your first spec
• How to organize your specifications using describe and it
• How to verify desired outcomes with expect
• How to interpret test failures
• How to keep your specs free of repeated setup code

RSpec uses the words describe and it to express concepts in a conversational
format:
• “Describe an ideal sandwich”
• “First, it is delicious”

## Tests vs. Specs vs. Examples

What’s the difference between tests, specs, and examples? They all refer to the code
you write to check your program’s behavior. The terms are semi-interchangeable, but
each carries a different emphasis:
• A test validates that a bit of code is working properly.
• A spec describes the desired behavior of a bit of code.
• An example shows how a particular API is intended to be used.
We’ll use all these terms in this book, depending on which aspect of testing we want
to emphasize.

# Arrange/Act/Assert pattern:

Arrange: set up an object,
Act: do something with it,
Assert: check that it behaved the way you wanted

Here, you create a Sandwich, ask it for its taste, and verify that the result is delicious.

```ruby
RSpec.describe 'An ideal sandwich' do
it 'is delicious' do
➤ sandwich = Sandwich.new('delicious', [])
➤
➤ taste = sandwich.taste
➤
➤ expect(taste).to eq('delicious')
end
end
```

Take one more look at the three RSpec methods we use in this snippet:
• RSpec.describe creates an example group (set of related tests).
• it creates an example (individual test).
• expect verifies an expected outcome (assertion).
